content/photo/nyc/harlem-hawk/index.md, before:

---
title: "Harlem Hawk"
slug: harlem-hawk
date: 2020-09-26T20:59:21Z
lastMod: 2020-09-26T20:59:21Z
description: An encounter with a hawk and a squirrel in St. Nicholas Park, Harlem.
tags: [Harlem, Hawk, Red-Tailed Hawk, St. Nicholas Park, Photography, Nervous Squirrel]
type: photo
# author: {name: David E. Wheeler, email: david@justatheory.com }
# via: {name: Example, href: https://example.com, title: Hello }
image: {src: hawk3.jpeg, alt: A Red-Tailed Hawk curiously watching a nervous squirrel climbing a tree, caption: Red-Tailed curiosity, title: Red-Tailed curiosity, metaonly: true }
---

Three months into the Covid-19 Pandemic, I had barely left the apartment. But
summer humidity splashed int our little apartment --- and it became clear that
outdoor spread is almost nonexistent --- I started taking daily walks. I quickly
expanded my range, delighted to find that one can walk from the south end of
Central Park at 59th Street to the northern­most tip of Manhattan almost
entirely in parks. It's really quite stunning, and there's so much to take in:
architecture, views, rivers, flowers and trees, wildlife --- the works. Those of
you who follow [my IG] know.

On my jaunt through [St. Nicholas Park] yesterday, a branch shook vigorously
ahead, alerting me to an unusual presence. As I approached, this keen stare
greeted me, a mere 5-8m.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk1.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed hawk sitting on a branch in New York City"
    caption = "Hello there, New Yorker."
%}}

I don't know what I expected to see, but it wasn't *this!* I've heard that
red-tailed hawks[^maybe-red-tailed] live in the trees or buildings of the nearby
[City College of New York], but I never saw one I could recognize, and certainly
not this close. Turns out, red-tailed hawks are quite common [residents of New
York City], committed to pest control and delighting residents and visitors
alike. Myself included.

This one, however, paid little attention to me. Rather, it seemed quite curious
about this black [squirrel] running up a tree between us, about a meter away.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk2.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed hawk and a black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "“Be cool, be cool…”"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk3.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed curiously eyes a black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "I mean look at the cock of the head!"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk4.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed curiously eyes a scampering black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "Watching the squirrel, watching me."
%}}

The squirrel kept running a loop up and down the tree. It would disappear from sight
(mine, not the hawk's), then reappear further down the trunk and scamper up again.
The hawk seemed curious, amused, then, perhaps, bored.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk5.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed stares at squirrel hidden from view in New York City"
    caption = "Tracking the squirrel down the tree."
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk6.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed cocks its head as it eyes a black squirrel hidden from view in New York City"
    caption = "“Where do you think *you're* going, rodent?”"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk7.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed watches a black squirrel scamper up a tree in New York City"
    caption = "Around and around and around."
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk8.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed watches a black squirrel scamper up a tree in New York City"
    caption = "Zoooooom!"
%}}

Eventually I put my phone away and continued my walk, but kept thinking about
this vignette. What story could one tell? Was the squirrel trying to protect its
home by distracting the hawk? Was the hawk already well-sated, and now committed
to satisfying its intellectual curiosity with a little [naturalistic
observation]? Maybe the hawk and the squirrel were friends and neighbors,
happy to enjoy a bit of camaraderie on a beautiful fall day in The City.

When I circled back an hour or so later, the hawk had moved across the path, and
now was poking around in the shrubbery. It saw me watching. Some ethno­graphy,
perhaps?

Naw, it kept picking something up and shaking its head; a dragonfly or cricket I
think, but couldn't get close enough to tell. Could be it was hungry after all.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk9.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed curiously eyes a black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "I see you!"
%}}

Either way, it made my day. Man I love this city.

  [^maybe-red-tailed]: At least I *think* this is a red-tailed hawk. Though I
  see many bird watchers on my city schlepps, I myself am not one. Please do
  give me a holler if you happen to know just how mistaken I am.

  [my IG]: https://www.instagram.com/theory/
  [St. Nicholas Park]: https://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/st-nicholas-park
  [City College of New York]: https://www.ccny.cuny.edu
  [residents of New York City]:
    https://www1.nyc.gov/site/wildlifenyc/animals/red-tailed-hawks.page
  [squirrel]: https://www.nycgovparks.org/programs/rangers/wildlife-management/squirrels
  [naturalistic observation]: https://explorable.com/naturalistic-observation

Commit message:

Fix harlem hawk photo metadata

content/photo/nyc/harlem-hawk/index.md, after:

---
title: "Harlem Hawk"
slug: harlem-hawk
date: 2020-09-26T20:59:21Z
lastMod: 2020-09-26T20:59:21Z
description: An encounter with a hawk and a squirrel in St. Nicholas Park, Harlem.
tags: [Harlem, Hawk, Red-Tailed Hawk, St. Nicholas Park, Photography, Nervous Squirrel]
type: photo
# author: {name: David E. Wheeler, email: david@justatheory.com }
# via: {name: Example, href: https://example.com, title: Hello }
image: {src: hawk3.jpeg, alt: A Red-Tailed Hawk curiously watching a nervous squirrel climbing a tree, caption: Red-Tailed curiosity, title: Red-Tailed curiosity, metaonly: true }
---

Three months into the Covid-19 Pandemic, I had barely left the apartment. But
summer humidity splashed int our little apartment --- and it became clear that
outdoor spread is almost nonexistent --- I started taking daily walks. I quickly
expanded my range, delighted to find that one can walk from the south end of
Central Park at 59th Street to the northern­most tip of Manhattan almost
entirely in parks. It's really quite stunning, and there's so much to take in:
architecture, views, rivers, flowers and trees, wildlife --- the works. Those of
you who follow [my IG] know.

On my jaunt through [St. Nicholas Park] yesterday, a branch shook vigorously
ahead, alerting me to an unusual presence. As I approached, this keen stare
greeted me, a mere 5-8m.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk1.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed hawk sitting on a branch in New York City"
    caption = "Hello there, New Yorker."
%}}

I don't know what I expected to see, but it wasn't *this!* I've heard that
red-tailed hawks[^maybe-red-tailed] live in the trees or buildings of the nearby
[City College of New York], but I never saw one I could recognize, and certainly
not this close. Turns out, red-tailed hawks are quite common [residents of New
York City], committed to pest control and delighting residents and visitors
alike. Myself included.

This one, however, paid little attention to me. Rather, it seemed quite curious
about this black [squirrel] running up a tree between us, about a meter away.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk2.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed hawk and a black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "“Be cool, be cool…”"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk3.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed curiously eyes a black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "I mean look at the cock of the head!"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk4.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed curiously eyes a scampering black squirrel in New York City"
    caption = "Watching the squirrel, watching me."
%}}

The squirrel kept running a loop up and down the tree. It would disappear from sight
(mine, not the hawk's), then reappear further down the trunk and scamper up again.
The hawk seemed curious, amused, then, perhaps, bored.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk5.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed stares at squirrel hidden from view in New York City"
    caption = "Tracking the squirrel down the tree."
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk6.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed cocks its head as it eyes a black squirrel hidden from view in New York City"
    caption = "“Where do you think *you're* going, rodent?”"
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk7.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed watches a black squirrel scamper up a tree in New York City"
    caption = "Around and around and around."
%}}

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk8.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed watches a black squirrel scamper up a tree in New York City"
    caption = "Zoooooom!"
%}}

Eventually I put my phone away and continued my walk, but kept thinking about
this vignette. What story could one tell? Was the squirrel trying to protect its
home by distracting the hawk? Was the hawk already well-sated, and now committed
to satisfying its intellectual curiosity with a little [naturalistic
observation]? Maybe the hawk and the squirrel were friends and neighbors,
happy to enjoy a bit of camaraderie on a beautiful fall day in The City.

When I circled back an hour or so later, the hawk had moved across the path, and
now was poking around in the ground cover. It saw me watching. Some
ethno­graphy, perhaps?

Naw, it kept picking something up and shaking its head; a dragonfly or cricket I
think, but couldn't get close enough to tell. Could be it was hungry after all.

{{% figure
    src    = "hawk9.jpeg"
    alt     = "A red-tailed hawk sitting among some ground cover in New York City"
    caption = "Poking among the ground cover, looking for a snack?"
%}}

Either way, it made my day. Man I love this city.

  [^maybe-red-tailed]: At least I *think* this is a red-tailed hawk. Though I
  see many bird watchers on my city schlepps, I myself am not one. Please do
  give me a holler if you happen to know just how mistaken I am.

  [my IG]: https://www.instagram.com/theory/
  [St. Nicholas Park]: https://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/st-nicholas-park
  [City College of New York]: https://www.ccny.cuny.edu
  [residents of New York City]:
    https://www1.nyc.gov/site/wildlifenyc/animals/red-tailed-hawks.page
  [squirrel]: https://www.nycgovparks.org/programs/rangers/wildlife-management/squirrels
  [naturalistic observation]: https://explorable.com/naturalistic-observation
