content/post/past/privacy/opt-out.md, before:

--- 
date: 2006-04-03T20:23:36Z
slug: opt-out
title: Tune In, Opt-Out
aliases: [/privacy/opt-out.html]
tags: [Privacy, marketing, direct marketing, credit cards]
type: post
---

<p>Mindful of the fact that Ovid has suffered <a href="http://publius-ovidius.livejournal.com/111672.html" title="Don't fuck with Ovid -- the long version">identity theft,</a> and <a href="http://publius-ovidius.livejournal.com/180912.html" title="How to (not) protect your credit">more than once</a>, at that, and that it's <a href="http://www.cockeyed.com/citizen/creditcard/application.shtml" title="The Torn-Up Credit Card Application">incredibly easy</a> for someone to get a credit card in your name, I was happy to hear from a friend that you can have your name removed from the pre-approved credit card application database, so to speak. In the U.S., all you need to do is call +1 (888) 5-OPT-OUT, provide some information (including your Social Security number--yikes!), and that's it. Given that it requires your SSN, I wasn't sure about it, but a quick Googling yielded <a href="http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/alerts/privprotalrt.htm" title="Privacy: What You Do Know Can Protect You">this FTC page</a> legitimizing the number. And it has links to get me off of direct mail and direct email lists, too. Sweet!</p>

<p>You should <a href="http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/alerts/privprotalrt.htm" title="Privacy: What You Do Know Can Protect You">visit the FTC page</a> right now and get off those lists, too.</p>

Commit message:

Convert old posts to Markdown
Done using Pandoc, with manual tweaking to fix tables, images, pre formatting, and footnotes.

content/post/past/privacy/opt-out.md, after:

--- 
date: 2006-04-03T20:23:36Z
slug: opt-out
title: Tune In, Opt-Out
aliases: [/privacy/opt-out.html]
tags: [Privacy, marketing, direct marketing, credit cards]
type: post
---

Mindful of the fact that Ovid has suffered [identity theft,] and [more than
once], at that, and that it's [incredibly easy] for someone to get a credit card
in your name, I was happy to hear from a friend that you can have your name
removed from the pre-approved credit card application database, so to speak. In
the U.S., all you need to do is call +1 (888) 5-OPT-OUT, provide some
information (including your Social Security number--yikes!), and that's it.
Given that it requires your SSN, I wasn't sure about it, but a quick Googling
yielded [this FTC page] legitimizing the number. And it has links to get me off
of direct mail and direct email lists, too. Sweet!

You should [visit the FTC page][this FTC page] right now and get off those
lists, too.

  [identity theft,]: http://publius-ovidius.livejournal.com/111672.html
    "Don't fuck with Ovid -- the long version"
  [more than once]: http://publius-ovidius.livejournal.com/180912.html
    "How to (not) protect your credit"
  [incredibly easy]: http://www.cockeyed.com/citizen/creditcard/application.shtml
    "The Torn-Up Credit Card Application"
  [this FTC page]: http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/alerts/privprotalrt.htm
    "Privacy: What You Do Know Can Protect You"
