--- 
date: 2009-06-22T17:34:27Z
slug: set-testing-update
title: pgTAP Set-Testing Update
aliases: [/computers/databases/postgresql/set_testing_update.html]
tags: [Postgres, testing, unit testing, relational algegra, pgTAP]
type: post
---

<p>I've been thinking more
about <a href="/computers/databases/postgresql/comparing-relations.html" title="Thoughts on Testing SQL Result Sets">testing SQL result sets</a> and
how to <a href="/computers/databases/postgresql/result-testing-function-names.html" title="Need Help Naming Result Set Testing Functions">name functions</a> that
do such testing, and I've started to come to some conclusions. Some of the
constraints I'm looking at:</p>

<ul>
  <li><p>Cursors are required for tests where the order of the results
      returned is important. It might be best for such functions to create the
      cursors themselves.</p></li>
  <li><p>For comparisons where order isn't important, the results of each SQL
      statement must be inserted into a temporary table and then the table
      used for the comparisons. Otherwise, each statement would be executed
      twice, as is required to calculate symmetric difference. By executing
      each once and storing the results in a temporary table, we get around
      this issue (and indeed, this one of the cases that
      <a href="http://epictest.org/" title="Epic: more full of fail than any other testing  tool">Epic</a>'s
      <code>global()</code> function addresses).</p></li>
  <li><p>When order is not important, the most efficient way to compare result
      sets is with symmetric difference. However, said comparison is a set
      comparison, meaning that duplicate rows are ignored. So if set A has 3
      rows and set B has four, but two of those four are identical, then sets
      A and B can still be equivalent.</p></li>
</ul>

<p>I'm starting to think that I would have two basic result set testing functions,
<code>set_eq()</code> and <code>bag_eq()</code>. The former would do a
set comparison, while the latter would require that duplicate rows be present
in both result sets. Unfortunately, that would mean that it would be
difficult for <code>set_eq</code> to have a variation that tests ordered
sets, as symmetric difference ignores relational ordering. And a simple
<code>bag_eq()</code> function would require that the relations be ordered, as
it would iterate over each row in each relation in turn and compare row to row.
But as I <a href="/computers/databases/postgresql/result-testing-function-names.html" title="Need Help Naming Result Set Testing Functions">pointed out</a> to
commenter “@dave0,” bags are not inherently ordered, so it would be imposing a
requirement that's not necessarily appropriate.</p>

<p>This is starting to drive me a bit nuts.</p>

<p>I think that there are ways to enforce an ordered comparison on a set and
an unordered comparison on a bag, but both would be pretty inefficient. Maybe
I should do it anyway, include the appropriate caveats in the documentation,
and then improve when feasible in the future. In that case, what I'd be
looking at is something like this:</p>

<dl>
<dt><code>set_eq( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for set equivalence of two SQL statements.</dd>

<dt><code>oset_eq( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for ordered set equivalence of two SQL statements.</dd>

<dt><code>bag_eq( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for row equivalence of two SQL statements.</dd>

<dt><code>obag_eq( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for ordered row equivalence of two SQL statements.</dd>
</dl>

<p>The preferred tests would be <code>set_eq()</code> and <code>obag_eq()</code>.
If a single word is passed to any of these functions, it's assumed to be
a prepared statement. Cursors would be created internally for the
functions that require ordered comparison. The non-ordered versions would create
temporary tables to hold the values and then use those tables for the comparisons.
 <code>bag_eq()</code> would also construct cursors on the temporary tables
to ensure that rows could be compared in the same order in which they were
generated by the SQL statement.</p>

<p>Interface-wise, perhaps a boolean would be preferred to indicate whether or
not to compare the rows in an ordered fashion? That would be:</p>

<dl>
<dt><code>set_eq( sql, sql, bool )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for set equivalence of two SQL statements. The sets must be in the same order if the boolean argument is true.</dd>

<dt><code>bag_eq( sql, sql, bool )</code></dt>
<dd>Test for row equivalence of two SQL statements. The bags must have their rows in the same order if the boolean argument is true.</dd>
</dl>

<p>I like that there are fewer functions this way, but is it harder to
remember what the boolean is for? (It would not be required, and would default
to false for both functions). Thoughts?</p>

<p>By the way, I would likely throw in a couple of other resultset-comparing
functions:</p>

<dl>
<dt><code>set_includes( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test that the set returned by the first statement includes the rows returned by the second statement.</dd>
<dt><code>set_excludes( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test that the set returned by the first statement excludes the rows returned by the second statement.</dd>
<dt><code>bag_includes( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test that the bag returned by the first statement includes the rows returned by the second statement, including duplicates.</dd>
<dd></dd>
<dt><code>bag_excludes( sql, sql )</code></dt>
<dd>Test that the bag returned by the first statement excludes the rows returned by the second statement, including duplicates.</dd>
<dd></dd>
</dl>

<p>Seem useful? Please leave a comment with your thoughts.</p>


<p class="past"><small>Looking for the comments? Try the <a rel="nofollow" href="//past.justatheory.com/computers/databases/postgresql/set_testing_update.html">old layout</a>.</small></p>


