content/post/past/tools/os/ntpd-configuration.md, before:

--- 
date: 2004-06-16T01:33:25Z
slug: ntpd-configuration
title: NTPD Configuration on FreeBSD and Red Hat Linux
aliases: [/computers/os/freebsd/ntpd_configuration.html]
tags: [FreeBSD, NTP, Red Hat, Linux]
type: post
---

<p>Well, I got no responses to my <a href="/computers/os/freebsd/ntptd_help_requested.html" title="I ask for help with NTPD">request for assistance</a> setting up NTPD on FreeBSD, but today I must've just been Googling better, because I found the resources I needed.</p>

<p>The most important site I found was the <a href="http://cfm.gs.washington.edu/network/ntp/ntp/" title="NTP Configuration">NTP configuration</a> page from Computer Facilities Management at the University of Washington. It was valuable because it provided some simple <em>ntpd.conf</em> file samples that set up <code>ntpd</code> to run only as a client. So no I'm confident that no one will try to connect to my servers and cause any mischief. The CFM NTP page also helpfully pointed out that I could easily enable ntpd on my Red Hat box by typing <code>chkconfig ntpd on</code>.</p>

<p>Another interesting site I found is <a href="http://www.pool.ntp.org/" title="pool.ntp.org">www.pool.ntp.org</a>. The cool thing about using <code>pool.ntp.org</code> as the time server to synchronize my servers to is that it distributes the load to lots of time servers. So I set up my <em>ntpd.conf</em> files to point first to <code>pool.ntp.org</code>, and then to two geographically close servers.</p>

<p>And finally, <a href="http://freeunix.dyndns.org:8088/site2/howto/NTP3.shtml" title="Using NTP">this DynDNS page</a> gave me the instruction I needed to get <code>ntpd</code> running on FreeBSD. All I had to do was add <code>xntpd_enable=&quot;YES&quot;</code> to <em>/etc/rc.conf</em>. I restarted my box, and now I'm in business!</p>

Commit message:

Convert old posts to Markdown
Done using Pandoc, with manual tweaking to fix tables, images, pre formatting, and footnotes.

content/post/past/tools/os/ntpd-configuration.md, after:

--- 
date: 2004-06-16T01:33:25Z
slug: ntpd-configuration
title: NTPD Configuration on FreeBSD and Red Hat Linux
aliases: [/computers/os/freebsd/ntpd_configuration.html]
tags: [FreeBSD, NTP, Red Hat, Linux]
type: post
---

Well, I got no responses to my [request for assistance] setting up NTPD on
FreeBSD, but today I must've just been Googling better, because I found the
resources I needed.

The most important site I found was the [NTP configuration] page from Computer
Facilities Management at the University of Washington. It was valuable because
it provided some simple *ntpd.conf* file samples that set up `ntpd` to run only
as a client. So no I'm confident that no one will try to connect to my servers
and cause any mischief. The CFM NTP page also helpfully pointed out that I could
easily enable ntpd on my Red Hat box by typing `chkconfig ntpd on`.

Another interesting site I found is [www.pool.ntp.org]. The cool thing about
using `pool.ntp.org` as the time server to synchronize my servers to is that it
distributes the load to lots of time servers. So I set up my *ntpd.conf* files
to point first to `pool.ntp.org`, and then to two geographically close servers.

And finally, [this DynDNS page] gave me the instruction I needed to get `ntpd`
running on FreeBSD. All I had to do was add `xntpd_enable="YES"` to
*/etc/rc.conf*. I restarted my box, and now I'm in business!

  [request for assistance]: /computers/os/freebsd/ntptd_help_requested.html
    "I ask for help with NTPD"
  [NTP configuration]: http://cfm.gs.washington.edu/network/ntp/ntp/
    "NTP Configuration"
  [www.pool.ntp.org]: http://www.pool.ntp.org/ "pool.ntp.org"
  [this DynDNS page]: http://freeunix.dyndns.org:8088/site2/howto/NTP3.shtml
    "Using NTP"
