content/post/past/travel/france/a-rouen/index.md, before:

--- 
date: 2012-06-28T11:04:20Z
slug: a-rouen
title: À Rouen
aliases: [/travel/france/2012/a-rouen.html]
tags: [France, Travel, Rouen, Home Exchange]
type: post
image:
  src: at-st-ouen.jpg
  alt: At the Church of St. Ouen
  title: At the Church of St. Ouen, Rouen
  class: left
---

We arrived Ã  Rouen just over a week ago. This is our second extended visit, a
house exchange with a lovely French couple who’s daughter lives in Portland. We
loved our [six-week visit in 2008], and were excited to do it again, this time
in summer. We will be here another six weeks.

In 2008, I was still an independent consultant. I did a bit of work for [Etsy]
during our visit, but for the most part did not work. For this visit, I’m
grateful to my employer, [iovation], for putting up with my absence and allowing
me to work remotely. So far it is working quite well, I think, especially since
most of my time is going into [Sqitch], an open-source project.

{{% figure
  src   = "domination-and-control.jpg"
  alt   = "Domination and Control"
  title = "Domination and Control"
  class = "right"
%}}

So I spend my mornings with my family, walking around Rouen, or teaching Anna
[Scratch], and my afternoons and evenings most days working. And because we’re
here, we can travel around Europe, too. This weekend we go to [Bruges]. Never
been there, but look forward to learning more about it!

Summer is a nice time to be here. We see many more people, and like Portland,
people seem happy to see each other on sunny days after a long, wet winter.
(Also like Portland, it rains a lot in June.) We’ve also shifted Ms 7’s schedule
so that she can be up late with all the other kids.

A few other items of interest:

-   Julie is blogging our trip on [her blog]. Read it if you like travel and
    good writing. Her slice of life stuff is much better than mine. :–)

-   Anna now has [her own blog], too. Check regularly for her photos.

-   {{% figure
        src   = "cidre.jpg"
        alt   = "Cidre"
        title = "Delicious, delicious cidre"
        class = "right"
    %}}
    
    Man oh man is the cider good here. Along with [Calvados], it is the regional
    drink of choice. Even the cheap grocery store stuff is amazing. It’s
    especially good [for lunch]!

-   I’m mostly taking pictures with Instagram; see [my Tubmblog] to follow
    along. I will also get out my DSLR some, though so fare I haven’t.

-   I asked [via Twitter] and [via Facebook][]: “Pop quiz: How many  devices
    does a family of three (parents, 7yo daughter) take for a 7 week house
    exchange in France? \#”. I know many of you are waiting on the answer, so
    here it is: 7:

    -   2 iPhones
    -   2 iPads
    -   2 MacBook Airs
    -   1 TV

    (Although [Darth thinks we should have brought an iMac in the kid’s
    backpack], it did not seem practical). The TV was a last-minute purchase,
    because I knew ahead of time that the house had an HDMI projector and
    optical-ready surround-sound system, so it seemed the best way to keep up
    with our shows. Haven’t used it much, yet. Everyone is reading on the iPads,
    though; Ms 7 has a *very* expensive reading habit!

  [six-week visit in 2008]: /travel/france/2008/ "France 2008"
  [Etsy]: http://etsy.com/
  [iovation]: http://iovation.com/
  [Sqitch]: https://sqitch.org/
  [Scratch]: http://scratch.mit.edu/
  [Bruges]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruges
  [her blog]: http://blog.strongrrl.com/
  [her own blog]: http://through-annas-eyes.tumblr.com/
  [Calvados]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calvados
  [for lunch]: http://blog.strongrrl.com/2012/06/how-french-do-lunch.html
  [my Tubmblog]: http://justatheory.tumblr.com/
  [via Twitter]: https://twitter.com/theory/status/216155640131883008
  [via Facebook]: https://www.facebook.com/david.e.wheeler/posts/10150891340703693
  [Darth thinks we should have brought an iMac in the kid’s backpack]: https://twitter.com/darth/status/216179141773504512

Commit message:

Add link and image scanning
And fix or remove a bunch of links

content/post/past/travel/france/a-rouen/index.md, after:

--- 
date: 2012-06-28T11:04:20Z
slug: a-rouen
title: À Rouen
aliases: [/travel/france/2012/a-rouen.html]
tags: [France, Travel, Rouen, Home Exchange]
type: post
image:
  src: at-st-ouen.jpg
  alt: At the Church of St. Ouen
  title: At the Church of St. Ouen, Rouen
  class: left
---

We arrived Ã  Rouen just over a week ago. This is our second extended visit, a
house exchange with a lovely French couple who’s daughter lives in Portland. We
loved our [six]-[week] [visit] [in] [2008], and were excited to do it again,
this time in summer. We will be here another six weeks.

In 2008, I was still an independent consultant. I did a bit of work for [Etsy]
during our visit, but for the most part did not work. For this visit, I’m
grateful to my employer, [iovation], for putting up with my absence and allowing
me to work remotely. So far it is working quite well, I think, especially since
most of my time is going into [Sqitch], an open-source project.

{{% figure
  src   = "domination-and-control.jpg"
  alt   = "Domination and Control"
  title = "Domination and Control"
  class = "right"
%}}

So I spend my mornings with my family, walking around Rouen, or teaching Anna
[Scratch], and my afternoons and evenings most days working. And because we’re
here, we can travel around Europe, too. This weekend we go to [Bruges]. Never
been there, but look forward to learning more about it!

Summer is a nice time to be here. We see many more people, and like Portland,
people seem happy to see each other on sunny days after a long, wet winter.
(Also like Portland, it rains a lot in June.) We’ve also shifted Ms 7’s schedule
so that she can be up late with all the other kids.

A few other items of interest:

-   Julie is blogging our trip on [her blog]. Read it if you like travel and
    good writing. Her slice of life stuff is much better than mine. :–)

-   Anna now has [her own blog], too. Check regularly for her photos.

-   {{% figure
        src   = "cidre.jpg"
        alt   = "Cidre"
        title = "Delicious, delicious cidre"
        class = "right"
    %}}
    
    Man oh man is the cider good here. Along with [Calvados], it is the regional
    drink of choice. Even the cheap grocery store stuff is amazing. It’s
    especially good [for lunch]!

-   I’m mostly taking pictures with Instagram; see [my Tubmblog] to follow
    along. I will also get out my DSLR some, though so fare I haven’t.

-   I asked [via Twitter] and [via Facebook][]: “Pop quiz: How many  devices
    does a family of three (parents, 7yo daughter) take for a 7 week house
    exchange in France? \#”. I know many of you are waiting on the answer, so
    here it is: 7:

    -   2 iPhones
    -   2 iPads
    -   2 MacBook Airs
    -   1 TV

    (Although [Darth thinks we should have brought an iMac in the kid’s
    backpack], it did not seem practical). The TV was a last-minute purchase,
    because I knew ahead of time that the house had an HDMI projector and
    optical-ready surround-sound system, so it seemed the best way to keep up
    with our shows. Haven’t used it much, yet. Everyone is reading on the iPads,
    though; Ms 7 has a *very* expensive reading habit!

  [six]: {{% link "/2008/11/arrived-in-france/" %}} "Arrival"
  [week]: {{% link "/2008/12/paris-photos/" %}} "Paris Photos"
  [visit]: {{% link "/2008/12/blue-eiffel-tower/" %}} "Blue Eiffel"
  [in]: {{% link "/2009/02/more-france-photos/" %}} "More France Photos"
  [2008]: {{% link "/2009/03/musee-du-quai-branly/" %}} "Musée du quai Branly"
  [Etsy]: http://etsy.com/
  [iovation]: http://iovation.com/
  [Sqitch]: https://sqitch.org/
  [Scratch]: http://scratch.mit.edu/
  [Bruges]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruges
  [her blog]: http://blog.strongrrl.com/
  [her own blog]: http://through-annas-eyes.tumblr.com/
  [Calvados]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calvados
  [for lunch]: http://blog.strongrrl.com/2012/06/how-french-do-lunch.html
  [my Tubmblog]: http://justatheory.tumblr.com/
  [via Twitter]: https://twitter.com/theory/status/216155640131883008
  [via Facebook]: https://www.facebook.com/david.e.wheeler/posts/10150891340703693
  [Darth thinks we should have brought an iMac in the kid’s backpack]: https://twitter.com/darth/status/216179141773504512
