--- 
date: 2008-01-21T18:10:44Z
slug: im-back
title: I'm Ba-aack!
aliases: [/autobiographical/im_back.html]
tags: [Personal, Work, Values Of n, Stikkit, I Want Sandy, Bricolage, Kineticode, Just a Theory]
type: post
---

{{% figure
    src   = "iwantsandy_207x207.gif"
    class = "right"
    alt   = "Sandy - your free personal email assistant"
    link  = "https://boingboing.net/2007/11/14/i-want-sandy-perfect.html"
%}}

Yes indeed, I am back. Was I ever gone? Well, yes, I've been rather busy for the
last 15 months.

But December 31 was my last day at [Values of n]. I'm really pleased with the
work I did there. [Sandy] in particular, was a pleasure to work with. I really
think that the work that Rael and I did with Sandy has been important work. Dare
I say potentially paradigm-shifting? At any rate, I'm convinced that Sandy is
really going to go places. If you haven't signed on to become her client, do
try. Though I will no longer be as intimate with her as I have in the past,
we're still going to keep in touchâ€”I'm still her client. And Rael will do a
great job pushing forward with her.

So why did I leave? Well, the truth is that, after [Julie's dad died] in July, I
found that I no longer had the resources to commit to the 80-100 hours/week
required to work in a startup. It was just no longer that important to me. Don't
get me wrong, it was rewarding work, but my priorities completely realigned. It
was vital that I continue helping Rael to get Sandy's career launched, but once
that was done, it was time for me to move on.

And what am I doing now? Well, first and foremost, I'm taking a few months off.
I'm going to spend a lot more time re-acquainting myself with the two terrific
women with whom I share a house, and just generally reset myself. Take a few
deep breaths. Relax and enjoy life a bit. Sleep in now and then. That sort of
thing.

That's not to say that I'll be sitting on my ass all the time. I have a very
long list of things I want to do during this time, including catch up on my
blogging (hence the title of this post), fix some bugs in Bricolage and help get
2.0 out the door, update my Perl libraries (I've got some great ideas for
improving [SVN::Notify]), finally get all my digital photos organized, etc. I
already spent much of last week revamping our mail system (I outsourced it to
[FuseMail]). And all that's leaving aside all the things Julie and I want to get
done around the house. That's the *really* important stuff.

But do watch for more blog posts in the coming months, too. There are a few
interesting things I want to write about, and I've got some serious catching-up
to do. Interested in following along on my adventures? [Follow me] via Twitter.

  [Values of n]: https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/values-of-n
  [Sandy]: https://boingboing.net/2007/11/14/i-want-sandy-perfect.html
    "You want sandy, trust me!"
  [Julie's dad died]: http://www.legacy.com/Link.asp?I=LS000091810982X
    "Obituary for Steven Rappaport"
  [SVN::Notify]: https://metacpan.org/dist/SVN-Notify "SVN::Notify on CPAN"
  [FuseMail]: http://www.fusemail.com/ "FuseMail home page"
  [Follow me]: https://twitter.com/Theory "My Twitter page"
