content/about/index.md, before:

---
title: About Just a Theory
type: about
outputs: [html, text]
image:
  src: theory.jpg
  alt: David E. "Theory" Wheeler
  title: David E. "Theory" Wheeler
  metaOnly: true
---

{{% figure src="theory.jpg" alt=`David E. "Theory" Wheeler` class="frame" %}}

*Just a Theory* is an periodically irregular technology and culture blog by
David E. Wheeler. Connect:

*   [Mastodon][]: {{% param "mastodon.user" %}}
*   [Bluesky][]: {{% param "bluesky.user" %}}
*   [LinkedIn][]: {{% param "linkedin.user" %}}
*   [GitHub][]: {{% param "github" %}}
*   ~Twitter~: [Deleted]
*   Email: `david` at this domain ([GPG Keys]({{% link "/keys/" %}}))

Colophon
--------

*Just a Theory* is written in [Markdown], built and published with [Hugo], and
hosted on [AWS]. Its set in [Source Sans Pro], with fixed-width type set in
[Source Code Pro]. The icons are by [Font Awesome].

This site eschews JavaScript and uses no tracking or analytics services.

  [Markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
  [Hugo]: https://gohugo.io
  [AWS]: https://aws.amazon.com/
  [Source Sans Pro]: https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-sans-pro
  [Source Code Pro]: https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-code-pro
  [Mastodon]: {{% param "mastodon.url" %}} "{{% param "mastodon.user" %}}"
  [Bluesky]: {{% param "bluesky.url" %}} "{{% param "bluesky.user" %}}"
  [LinkedIn]: {{% param "linkedin.url" %}} "{{% param "linkedin.user" %}}"
  [GitHub]: https://github.com/{{% param "github" %}}
  [Deleted]: {{% ref "/post/tech/bye-twitter" %}} "Bye Twitter"
  [Font Awesome]: https://fontawesome.com

Commit message:

Add license to about page

content/about/index.md, after:

---
title: About Just a Theory
type: about
outputs: [html, text]
image:
  src: theory.jpg
  alt: David E. "Theory" Wheeler
  title: David E. "Theory" Wheeler
  metaOnly: true
---

{{% figure src="theory.jpg" alt=`David E. "Theory" Wheeler` class="frame" %}}

*Just a Theory* is an periodically irregular technology and culture blog by
David E. Wheeler. Connect:

*   [Mastodon][]: {{% param "mastodon.user" %}}
*   [Bluesky][]: {{% param "bluesky.user" %}}
*   [LinkedIn][]: {{% param "linkedin.user" %}}
*   [GitHub][]: {{% param "github" %}}
*   ~Twitter~: [Deleted]
*   Email: `david` at this domain ([GPG Keys]({{% link "/keys/" %}}))

Colophon
--------

*Just a Theory* is written in [Markdown], built and published with [Hugo], and
hosted on [AWS]. Its set in [Source Sans Pro], with fixed-width type set in
[Source Code Pro]. The icons are by [Font Awesome].

This site eschews JavaScript and uses no tracking or analytics services.

License
--------

<p id="license" xmlns:cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#" xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/">
  <a property="dct:title" rel="cc:attributionURL" href="/">Just a Theory</a>
  by <a rel="cc:attributionURL dct:creator" property="cc:attributionName" href="/about">David E.Wheeler</a>
  is licensed under <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/" target="_blank" rel="license noopener noreferrer">CC BY-NC-SA 4.0<img src="/img/cc.svg" alt="(CC)"><img src="/img/by.svg" alt="(BY)"><img src="/img/nc.svg" alt="(NC)"><img src="/img/sa.svg" alt="(SA)"></a>.
</p>

  [Markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
  [Hugo]: https://gohugo.io
  [AWS]: https://aws.amazon.com/
  [Source Sans Pro]: https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-sans-pro
  [Source Code Pro]: https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-code-pro
  [Mastodon]: {{% param "mastodon.url" %}} "{{% param "mastodon.user" %}}"
  [Bluesky]: {{% param "bluesky.url" %}} "{{% param "bluesky.user" %}}"
  [LinkedIn]: {{% param "linkedin.url" %}} "{{% param "linkedin.user" %}}"
  [GitHub]: https://github.com/{{% param "github" %}}
  [Deleted]: {{% ref "/post/tech/bye-twitter" %}} "Bye Twitter"
  [Font Awesome]: https://fontawesome.com
