content/post/postgres/state-of-the-extension-ecosystem.md, before:

---
title: State of the Extension Ecosystem
slug: state-of-the-extension-ecosystem
date: 2024-03-04T18:50:24Z
lastMod: 2024-03-04T18:50:24Z
description: ~
tags: [Postgres, PGXN, Extensions, PGConf, Summit]
type: post
image:
  src: /2024/02/extension-ecosystem-summit/summit.jpeg
  link: https://www.eventbrite.com/e/851125899477/
  title: Postgres Extension Ecosystem Mini-Summit
  alt: Photo of the summit of Mount Hood
  copyright: 2011 David E. Wheeler
---

A quick reminder that I'll be giving a brief talk on the "State of the Extension
Ecosystem" on Wednesday at noon US Eastern / 17:00 UTC. This talk is the first
in a series of [community talks and discussions][mini-summit] on the postgres
extension ecosystem leading up to the [Extension Ecosystem Summit][the summit]
at pgconf.dev on May 28.

I plan to give a brief history of Postgres extension tools and distribution,
the challenges encountered, recent developments, and opportunities for the
future. It should take about 30 minutes, followed by discussion. Following
this pattern for all the talks in [the series][mini-summit],  I hope to set up
some engaging discussions and to surface significant topics ahead of [the
summit].

 [Join us][mini-summit]! Need other information or just want an invitation
 without using Eventbrite, hit me up at `david@` this domain, or on the
 Postgres Slack. See you there!

  [mini-summit]: https://www.eventbrite.com/e/851125899477/
    "Postgres Extension Ecosystem Mini-Summit"
  [the summit]: https://www.pgevents.ca/events/pgconfdev2024/schedule/session/191

Commit message:

Add contact links to ecosystem talk post

content/post/postgres/state-of-the-extension-ecosystem.md, after:

---
title: "Talk: State of the Extension Ecosystem"
slug: state-of-the-extension-ecosystem
date: 2024-03-04T18:50:24Z
lastMod: 2024-03-04T20:12:11Z
description: |
  A quick reminder that I'll be giving a brief talk on the "State of the
  Extension Ecosystem" on Wednesday at noon US Eastern / 17:00 UTC.
tags: [Postgres, PGXN, Extensions, PGConf, Summit]
type: post
image:
  src: /2024/02/extension-ecosystem-summit/summit.jpeg
  link: https://www.eventbrite.com/e/851125899477/
  title: Postgres Extension Ecosystem Mini-Summit
  alt: Photo of the summit of Mount Hood
  copyright: 2011 David E. Wheeler
---

A quick reminder that I'll be giving a brief talk on the "State of the Extension
Ecosystem" on Wednesday at noon US Eastern / 17:00 UTC. This talk is the first
in a series of [community talks and discussions][mini-summit] on the postgres
extension ecosystem leading up to the [Extension Ecosystem Summit][the summit]
at pgconf.dev on May 28.

I plan to give a brief history of Postgres extension tools and distribution,
the challenges encountered, recent developments, and opportunities for the
future. It should take about 30 minutes, followed by discussion. Following
this pattern for all the talks in [the series][mini-summit],  I hope to set up
some engaging discussions and to surface significant topics ahead of [the
summit].

 [Join us][mini-summit]! Need other information or just want an invitation
 without using Eventbrite, hit me up at `david@` this domain, [on Mastodon], or
via the [#extensions] channel on the [Postgres Slack].

  [mini-summit]: https://www.eventbrite.com/e/851125899477/
    "Postgres Extension Ecosystem Mini-Summit"
  [the summit]: https://www.pgevents.ca/events/pgconfdev2024/schedule/session/191
  [#extensions]: https://postgresteam.slack.com/archives/C056ZA93H1A
    "Postgres Slack/#extensions: Extensions and extension-related accessories"
  [Postgres Slack]: https://pgtreats.info/slack-invite
    "Join the Postgres Slack"
  [on Mastodon]: {{% param "mastodon.url" %}} "{{% param "mastodon.user" %}}"
