content/post/markup/plain-text-figures/index.md, before:

---
title: "Plain Text Figures"
date: 2018-06-07T13:26:51Z
lastMod: 2018-06-07T13:26:51Z
description: How I went about formatting embedded figures in the plain text output for *Just a Theory.*
tags: [Markup, Just a Theory, JSON Feed, Markdown, Plain Text, Image, Figure]
type: post
---

A couple weeks ago, I implemented [JSON Feed] for *Just a Theory* (subscribe
[here]). A nice feature of the format is that support for plain text content in
addition to the expected HTML content. It reminds me of the [Daring Fireball]
plain text feature: just append `.text` to any post to see its [Markdown]
representation, [like this]. I'm a sucker for plain text, so followed suit. Now
you can read the [wedding anniversary post] in plain text simply by [appending
`copy.text`] to the URL (or via the JSON Feed).

Markdowners will notice something off about the formatting: the embedded image
looks nothing like Markdown. Here it is:

<pre><code>
{{&#37; figure
  src     = "dance.jpg"
  title   = "dance.jpg"
  alt     = "First Dance"
  caption = "First dance, 28 May 1995."
%}}
</code></pre>

This format defines an HTML [figure] in the [Hugo figure shortcode] format.
It's serviceable for writing posts, but not beautiful. In Markdown, it would
look like this:

``` markdown
![First Dance](dance.jpg "First Dance")
```

Which, sadly, doesn't allow for a caption. Worse, it's not great to read: it's
too similar to the text [link format], and doesn't look much like an image, let
alone a figure. Even Markdown creator [John Gruber] doesn't seem to use the
syntax much, preferring the HTML [`<img>`] element, as in [this example]. But
that's not super legible, either; it hardly differs from the shortcode format.
I'd prefer a nicer syntax for embedded images and figures, but alas, Markdown
hasn't one.

Fortunately, the `copy.text` output needn't be valid Markdown. It's a plain text
output intended for reading, not for parsing into HTML. This frees me to make
figures and images appear however I like.

Framed
------

Still, I appreciate the philosophy behind Markdown, which is best summarized by
this bit from the [docs][Markdown]:

> The overriding design goal for Markdown's formatting syntax is to make it as
> readable as possible. The idea is that a Markdown-formatted document should
> be publishable as-is, as plain text, without looking like it’s been marked up
> with tags or formatting instructions.

So how do you make an embedded image look like an image without any obvious
tags? How about we frame it?

```
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
        {                                                          }
        {                      [First Dance]                       }
        {  https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg  }
        {                                                          }
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
        {  First dance, 28 May 1995.                               }
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

Think of the braces and tildes like a gilded frame. In the top section, we have
the bracketed alt text like a descriptive card, followed by the image URL. Below
the image area, separated by another line of tildes, we have the caption. If you
squint, it looks like an image in a frame, right? If you want to include a link,
just add it below the image URL. Here's an example adapted from [this old post]:

```
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                         }
  {                       [*Vogue* on the new iPad]                         }
  {   https://justatheory.com/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/vogue-ipad-retina.jpg }
  {      (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/7007813933/sizes/l/)         }
  {                                                                         }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {  Image content from *Vogue* on the new iPad. Not shown: the second that }
  {  that it's blurry while the image engine finishes loading and           }
  {  displaying the image.                                                  }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

The link appears in parentheses (just like in the text [link format]). The
format also preserves the alt text and caption Markdown formatting. Want to
include multiple images in a figure? Just add them, as long as the caption, if
there is one, appears in the last "box" in the "frame":

```
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                            }
  {                   [*The New Yorker* on the 1st gen iPad]                   }
  {      http://localhost:1313/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/new-yorker-ipad-1.jpg   }
  {         (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/6861697774/sizes/o/)         }
  {                                                                            }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                            }
  {         [*The New Yorker* on the 3rd gen iPad with retina display]         }
  {   http://localhost:1313/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/new-yorker-ipad-retina.jpg }
  {         (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/7007813821/sizes/o/)         }
  {                                                                            }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {  Text content from *The New Yorker* on the first generation iPad (top)     }
  {  and the third generation iPad with retina display (bottom). Looks great   }
  {  because it's text.                                                        }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

You can tell I like to center the images, though not the caption. Maybe you
don't need a caption or much else. It could be quite minimal: just an image and
alt text:

```
        {                      [First Dance]                       }
        {  https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg  }
```

Here I've eschewed the blank lines and tildes; the dont' feel necessary without
the caption.

This format could be parsed reasonably well, but that's not really the goal. The
point is legible figures that stand out from the text. I think this design does
the trick, but let's take it a step further. Because everything is framed in
braces, we might decide to put whatever we want in there. Like, I dunno, replace
the alt text with an ASCII art[^figure-ascii] version of the image generated by
an [conversion interface]? Here's my wedding photo again:

```
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
{                                                                                    }
{  NNNmmdsyyyyyyysssssdhyssooo+++++++++++++ooymNNNNyo+/::::-----------------------:  }
{  NNmNmdssyyyyyssssssdhyssooo++++///++++++ooymNmmmyo+/:::--------...-------------:  }
{  mmddddsyyyyyyssssssdhyssoo++++/////++++osydmmmmNyo+/::--------.....-------------  }
{  Nmddmmsyyyyyyssssssdhysooo+++///////++osso+oymNNyo+/::--------.......-----------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyysssssshhysooo+++//////+ys+//:///sdmho+/::-------..........---------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyssssosshhysooo+++////+ydmy/:/:/+ossydo+/::------...........---------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyysssoosshhysosshdy+/+odmNNmdyddmmNNmdmms+::------............--------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyssooosshdhyso:/ymhhdmNNNNNmyhNNNNNNNNNmmo:------.............-------  }
{  mdddmmhyyyysssooossdmdmho.-hmmNNNNNNNmdyhmNNNNNNNNNmh+/+/--..............-------  }
{  mmmmddhyyyysssoooymmNmNmo--yNNmNmmmmmhhyhdhydNNNNmmmdysshy:..............-------  }
{  mmmddmhyyyssssoosdNNNNNmssydmNddhssossyyhs::+ssyhmmh+///ohh-..............------  }
{  Nmmmmmdyyyssssoohhdmddhs:-:hdhyhdso+++///--::/:::+o/://oosy:-.............------  }
{  NNNmmmdyyyssssosdhhyyh+//oohdmmmh///+/::::::---:++/://+hddmdho:...........------  }
{  NNNmmmdyyyssssosmmdmdy+.-/mmdmho+//////::::::/sddddhs/.:sdmmmmy-..........------  }
{  NNmmmmdhyyssssooydmmd+/+sydNmmh+/+yddyo/://oydmmmmmmdy:..:ymds:............-----  }
{  mmmmmmdhyysssoooo+oo+ohdmmmmmddhhsyddddysyddddmmmdddho-..`./h/.............-----  }
{  mmNNNNmhyysssoooo:-/.-ymmmmmmmmmmmNmdddmmmdmdddhhhhs-```````/h-............-----  }
{  NNNNNNmhyysssooymddmddmmmdddddmdmmNmyddmddddhhhhhy:`   ` ```.oo............-----  }
{  NNNNNNmhyyssssymmmNNmmmddhhddddmddddhddmdhddhhhhs-     ` ```.:y............-----  }
{  NNmdmNmhyysssydNmmNmmmddddddddddddhdddhddhhhhhho.      ``````.y............-----  }
{  mmmddmmdhyssssdmmhdmmmddddddhhdhhhhhddhhhdhhho-`       `` ```.s...........------  }
{  ddddhdddhyysssymNmmmmmddddddddhhdhhhhdddddy+.``        `` ```.s............-----  }
{  NNNmmddhyyssssosdddmmmmdddddddhhdddmmmmd+..```        `` ````-s............-----  }
{  NNNmmhysssssssooooymmmmdddmmmdhhdmdmdddd/``.`        ``  ```.-o...........------  }
{  mNNmddhhysssssssssydmmmmdmmmmmddmmddddhdd+``        `` `````.-/...........------  }
{  NNNmmddhhhhyyyyyyyyhmmmmmmmmmmddddddddhhy.``    ` ``` ``````./-...........------  }
{  NNNmmmysssssssssssssdmmmmmmmddddddddddh+.`     ` ```   `````.+...........-------  }
{  mmmNmmhyyyyyhhhhhhhhdmmmmmmddddddddddy:`````` `````   ``````-:...........-------  }
{  mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmddhdmmmddddddddddy/.`````` ````       ```./...........-------:  }
{  mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmhyssdmmmmdddddho:.``````````-```  ``````./:...........-------:  }
{  mmmmmNmmmmmmmmmddddhysydmmddho:-...`````````:oh/```` ````.-:............-------:  }
{  mmmmNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmddyoydo:.``.`````````.:+ydddh-```````-/--............-------:  }
{  NNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmdyyyoo.````...`````:ohdmdddddh+oosyyhdmo--..........--------:  }
{  NNNNNNNNmmmmmmmNmmmmhys+//-```...`.-+yddddmmmddddmmmmmmmmmm+--.......----------:  }
{  NNNNNNNNNmmmmNNNNNmmsyysohdyosyhyyhddddddddmmmmmdmmmmmmmmmmh--.......---------::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNyyhhdmmdddmmdddddmddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmd-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmdddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmy-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm+-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmNNNmmmmmmmmmdmdmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmh:----------------::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmdmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmo----------------:::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm/---------------::::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNNmy::::::::--:-:::::::://  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmmo///:::::::::::::::////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmmy///////////////////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmm/::::::::::::::::::::::/  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddddddddhddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmy::::::::::--:::::::::///  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmmNNNmNyo++++/////////////++++oo  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmNNNmmNhyyyyyyssssssssssssssssss  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmNmNNmmmysssssooooo+++++/////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmddddddddddddddmmmmmmmNNNNNmmmd/::::::::::::::://///////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmddddddddddddmmmmmmNNNmNmmmmd::::::::::::::://////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmmmdddddddddmmmmmmNmmmNmmmmmh::::::::://///////++os+++  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmmmmddddddddmmNmNNmmmNmNNmmNh/::::///////////+oo+++++o  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmddddddddddmmNmmmmmmmNNNNmmNy////////+oossyyhhhdddmmmN  }
{                                                                                    }
{               https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg               }
{                                                                                    }
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
{  First dance, 28 May 1995.                                                         }
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

Silly? Maybe. But I'm having fun with it. I expect to wrangle Hugo into emitting
something like this soon.

  [^figure-ascii]: Surely someone has come up with a way to improve on ASCII art by using [box elements] or something?

  [JSON Feed]: https://jsonfeed.org
  [here]: {{% ref "/" "json" %}}
  [Daring Fireball]: https://daringfireball.net
  [Markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
  [like this]: https://daringfireball.net/linked/2018/06/05/goode-federighi-uikit.text
  [wedding anniversary post]: {{% ref "/photo/personal/twenty-three" %}}
  [appending `copy.text`]: {{% ref "/photo/personal/twenty-three" "text" %}}
  [figure]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/figure
  [Hugo figure shortcode]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure
  [link format]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link
  [John Gruber]: https://daringfireball.net/colophon/
  [`<img>`]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/img
  [this example]: https://daringfireball.net/2017/05/halide.text
  [this old post]: {{% ref "/post/past/apps/conde-nast-ipad" %}}
  [conversion interface]: https://www.text-image.com/
  [box elements]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Box-drawing_character
    "Wikipedia: “Box-drawing character”"

Commit message:

Move plain text to $slug.text

content/post/markup/plain-text-figures/index.md, after:

---
title: "Plain Text Figures"
date: 2018-06-07T13:26:51Z
lastMod: 2023-08-05T21:23:40Z
description: How I went about formatting embedded figures in the plain text output for *Just a Theory.*
tags: [Markup, Just a Theory, JSON Feed, Markdown, Plain Text, Image, Figure]
type: post
---

A couple weeks ago, I implemented [JSON Feed] for *Just a Theory* (subscribe
[here]). A nice feature of the format is that support for plain text content in
addition to the expected HTML content. It reminds me of the [Daring Fireball]
plain text feature: just append `.text` to any post to see its [Markdown]
representation, [like this]. I'm a sucker for plain text, so followed suit. Now
you can read the [wedding anniversary post] in plain text simply by [appending
`.text`] to the URL (or via the JSON Feed).

Markdowners will notice something off about the formatting: the embedded image
looks nothing like Markdown. Here it is:

<pre><code>
{{&#37; figure
  src     = "dance.jpg"
  title   = "dance.jpg"
  alt     = "First Dance"
  caption = "First dance, 28 May 1995."
%}}
</code></pre>

This format defines an HTML [figure] in the [Hugo figure shortcode] format.
It's serviceable for writing posts, but not beautiful. In Markdown, it would
look like this:

``` markdown
![First Dance](dance.jpg "First Dance")
```

Which, sadly, doesn't allow for a caption. Worse, it's not great to read: it's
too similar to the text [link format], and doesn't look much like an image, let
alone a figure. Even Markdown creator [John Gruber] doesn't seem to use the
syntax much, preferring the HTML [`<img>`] element, as in [this example]. But
that's not super legible, either; it hardly differs from the shortcode format.
I'd prefer a nicer syntax for embedded images and figures, but alas, Markdown
hasn't one.

Fortunately, the `.text` output needn't be valid Markdown. It's a plain text
output intended for reading, not for parsing into HTML. This frees me to make
figures and images appear however I like.

Framed
------

Still, I appreciate the philosophy behind Markdown, which is best summarized by
this bit from the [docs][Markdown]:

> The overriding design goal for Markdown's formatting syntax is to make it as
> readable as possible. The idea is that a Markdown-formatted document should
> be publishable as-is, as plain text, without looking like it’s been marked up
> with tags or formatting instructions.

So how do you make an embedded image look like an image without any obvious
tags? How about we frame it?

```
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
        {                                                          }
        {                      [First Dance]                       }
        {  https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg  }
        {                                                          }
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
        {  First dance, 28 May 1995.                               }
        {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

Think of the braces and tildes like a gilded frame. In the top section, we have
the bracketed alt text like a descriptive card, followed by the image URL. Below
the image area, separated by another line of tildes, we have the caption. If you
squint, it looks like an image in a frame, right? If you want to include a link,
just add it below the image URL. Here's an example adapted from [this old post]:

```
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                         }
  {                       [*Vogue* on the new iPad]                         }
  {   https://justatheory.com/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/vogue-ipad-retina.jpg }
  {      (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/7007813933/sizes/l/)         }
  {                                                                         }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {  Image content from *Vogue* on the new iPad. Not shown: the second that }
  {  that it's blurry while the image engine finishes loading and           }
  {  displaying the image.                                                  }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

The link appears in parentheses (just like in the text [link format]). The
format also preserves the alt text and caption Markdown formatting. Want to
include multiple images in a figure? Just add them, as long as the caption, if
there is one, appears in the last "box" in the "frame":

```
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                            }
  {                   [*The New Yorker* on the 1st gen iPad]                   }
  {      http://localhost:1313/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/new-yorker-ipad-1.jpg   }
  {         (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/6861697774/sizes/o/)         }
  {                                                                            }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {                                                                            }
  {         [*The New Yorker* on the 3rd gen iPad with retina display]         }
  {   http://localhost:1313/2012/03/conde-nast-ipad/new-yorker-ipad-retina.jpg }
  {         (https://www.flickr.com/photos/theory/7007813821/sizes/o/)         }
  {                                                                            }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
  {  Text content from *The New Yorker* on the first generation iPad (top)     }
  {  and the third generation iPad with retina display (bottom). Looks great   }
  {  because it's text.                                                        }
  {~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

You can tell I like to center the images, though not the caption. Maybe you
don't need a caption or much else. It could be quite minimal: just an image and
alt text:

```
        {                      [First Dance]                       }
        {  https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg  }
```

Here I've eschewed the blank lines and tildes; the dont' feel necessary without
the caption.

This format could be parsed reasonably well, but that's not really the goal. The
point is legible figures that stand out from the text. I think this design does
the trick, but let's take it a step further. Because everything is framed in
braces, we might decide to put whatever we want in there. Like, I dunno, replace
the alt text with an ASCII art[^figure-ascii] version of the image generated by
an [conversion interface]? Here's my wedding photo again:

```
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
{                                                                                    }
{  NNNmmdsyyyyyyysssssdhyssooo+++++++++++++ooymNNNNyo+/::::-----------------------:  }
{  NNmNmdssyyyyyssssssdhyssooo++++///++++++ooymNmmmyo+/:::--------...-------------:  }
{  mmddddsyyyyyyssssssdhyssoo++++/////++++osydmmmmNyo+/::--------.....-------------  }
{  Nmddmmsyyyyyyssssssdhysooo+++///////++osso+oymNNyo+/::--------.......-----------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyysssssshhysooo+++//////+ys+//:///sdmho+/::-------..........---------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyssssosshhysooo+++////+ydmy/:/:/+ossydo+/::------...........---------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyysssoosshhysosshdy+/+odmNNmdyddmmNNmdmms+::------............--------  }
{  mmmmmmyyyyyyssooosshdhyso:/ymhhdmNNNNNmyhNNNNNNNNNmmo:------.............-------  }
{  mdddmmhyyyysssooossdmdmho.-hmmNNNNNNNmdyhmNNNNNNNNNmh+/+/--..............-------  }
{  mmmmddhyyyysssoooymmNmNmo--yNNmNmmmmmhhyhdhydNNNNmmmdysshy:..............-------  }
{  mmmddmhyyyssssoosdNNNNNmssydmNddhssossyyhs::+ssyhmmh+///ohh-..............------  }
{  Nmmmmmdyyyssssoohhdmddhs:-:hdhyhdso+++///--::/:::+o/://oosy:-.............------  }
{  NNNmmmdyyyssssosdhhyyh+//oohdmmmh///+/::::::---:++/://+hddmdho:...........------  }
{  NNNmmmdyyyssssosmmdmdy+.-/mmdmho+//////::::::/sddddhs/.:sdmmmmy-..........------  }
{  NNmmmmdhyyssssooydmmd+/+sydNmmh+/+yddyo/://oydmmmmmmdy:..:ymds:............-----  }
{  mmmmmmdhyysssoooo+oo+ohdmmmmmddhhsyddddysyddddmmmdddho-..`./h/.............-----  }
{  mmNNNNmhyysssoooo:-/.-ymmmmmmmmmmmNmdddmmmdmdddhhhhs-```````/h-............-----  }
{  NNNNNNmhyysssooymddmddmmmdddddmdmmNmyddmddddhhhhhy:`   ` ```.oo............-----  }
{  NNNNNNmhyyssssymmmNNmmmddhhddddmddddhddmdhddhhhhs-     ` ```.:y............-----  }
{  NNmdmNmhyysssydNmmNmmmddddddddddddhdddhddhhhhhho.      ``````.y............-----  }
{  mmmddmmdhyssssdmmhdmmmddddddhhdhhhhhddhhhdhhho-`       `` ```.s...........------  }
{  ddddhdddhyysssymNmmmmmddddddddhhdhhhhdddddy+.``        `` ```.s............-----  }
{  NNNmmddhyyssssosdddmmmmdddddddhhdddmmmmd+..```        `` ````-s............-----  }
{  NNNmmhysssssssooooymmmmdddmmmdhhdmdmdddd/``.`        ``  ```.-o...........------  }
{  mNNmddhhysssssssssydmmmmdmmmmmddmmddddhdd+``        `` `````.-/...........------  }
{  NNNmmddhhhhyyyyyyyyhmmmmmmmmmmddddddddhhy.``    ` ``` ``````./-...........------  }
{  NNNmmmysssssssssssssdmmmmmmmddddddddddh+.`     ` ```   `````.+...........-------  }
{  mmmNmmhyyyyyhhhhhhhhdmmmmmmddddddddddy:`````` `````   ``````-:...........-------  }
{  mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmddhdmmmddddddddddy/.`````` ````       ```./...........-------:  }
{  mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmhyssdmmmmdddddho:.``````````-```  ``````./:...........-------:  }
{  mmmmmNmmmmmmmmmddddhysydmmddho:-...`````````:oh/```` ````.-:............-------:  }
{  mmmmNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmddyoydo:.``.`````````.:+ydddh-```````-/--............-------:  }
{  NNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmdyyyoo.````...`````:ohdmdddddh+oosyyhdmo--..........--------:  }
{  NNNNNNNNmmmmmmmNmmmmhys+//-```...`.-+yddddmmmddddmmmmmmmmmm+--.......----------:  }
{  NNNNNNNNNmmmmNNNNNmmsyysohdyosyhyyhddddddddmmmmmdmmmmmmmmmmh--.......---------::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNyyhhdmmdddmmdddddmddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmd-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmdddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmy-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm+-----------------:::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmNNNmmmmmmmmmdmdmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmh:----------------::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmdmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmo----------------:::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm/---------------::::::  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNNmy::::::::--:-:::::::://  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmmo///:::::::::::::::////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmmy///////////////////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmNmm/::::::::::::::::::::::/  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmdddddddddhddddddmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmy::::::::::--:::::::::///  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmmNNNmNyo++++/////////////++++oo  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmmNNNmmNhyyyyyyssssssssssssssssss  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmdddddddddddddddmmmmmmmmmNmNNmmmysssssooooo+++++/////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmddddddddddddddmmmmmmmNNNNNmmmd/::::::::::::::://///////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmddddddddddddmmmmmmNNNmNmmmmd::::::::::::::://////////  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmmmdddddddddmmmmmmNmmmNmmmmmh::::::::://///////++os+++  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmdmmmmddddddddmmNmNNmmmNmNNmmNh/::::///////////+oo+++++o  }
{  NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNmmmmmmmddddddddddmmNmmmmmmmNNNNmmNy////////+oossyyhhhdddmmmN  }
{                                                                                    }
{               https://justatheory.com/2018/05/twenty-three/dance.jpg               }
{                                                                                    }
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
{  First dance, 28 May 1995.                                                         }
{~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~}
```

Silly? Maybe. But I'm having fun with it. I expect to wrangle Hugo into emitting
something like this soon.

**Update 2023-08-05:** Changed the location of plain text files for each post
from `$slug/copy.text` to `$slug.text`, and updated the links in this post to
reflect that change. In other words, the plain text file for this post is now
[`plain-text-figures.text`]({{% ref "/post/markup/plain-text-figures" "text" %}}).

  [^figure-ascii]: Surely someone has come up with a way to improve on ASCII art
    by using [box elements] or something?

  [JSON Feed]: https://jsonfeed.org
  [here]: {{% ref "/" "json" %}}
  [Daring Fireball]: https://daringfireball.net
  [Markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
  [like this]: https://daringfireball.net/linked/2018/06/05/goode-federighi-uikit.text
  [wedding anniversary post]: {{% ref "/photo/personal/twenty-three" %}}
  [appending `.text`]: {{% ref "/photo/personal/twenty-three" "text" %}}
  [figure]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/figure
  [Hugo figure shortcode]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#figure
  [link format]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link
  [John Gruber]: https://daringfireball.net/colophon/
  [`<img>`]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/img
  [this example]: https://daringfireball.net/2017/05/halide.text
  [this old post]: {{% ref "/post/past/apps/conde-nast-ipad" %}}
  [conversion interface]: https://www.text-image.com/
  [box elements]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Box-drawing_character
    "Wikipedia: “Box-drawing character”"
