--- 
date: 2009-04-23T18:15:06Z
slug: bricolage-svn-to-git
title: Migrating Bricolage Subversion to Git
aliases: [/computers/vcs/git/bricolage-svn-to-git.html]
tags: [Bricolage, Git, Subversion, CVS, SCM]
type: post
---

Following up on last week's [post] on migrating the old Bricolage SourceForge
CVS repository to Git, here are my notes on migrating the current [Bricolage
Subversion repository] to Git.

It turns out that migrating from Subversion is much more of a pain than
migrating from CVS. Why? Because CVS has real tags, while Subversion does not.
So while `git-svn` tries to identify all of your tags and branches, it's really
relying on your Subversion repository using standard directories for all of your
branches and tags. And while we've used a standard for [branches directory], our
[tags setup] is a *bit* more complicated.

The problem was that we used tags every time we merged between branches. This
meant that we ended up with a lot of tags with names like
“merge\_rev\_1\_10\_5665” to indicate a merge from the “rev\_1\_10” branch into
trunk at r5665. Plus we had tags for releases. So [Marshall] took it upon
himself to reorganize the tags in the Subversion tree so that all release tags
went into the “releases” subdirectory, and merges went into subdirectories named
for the branch from which the merge derived. Those subdirectories went into the
“merges” subdirectory. We ended up with a directory structure organized like
this:

    /tags/
      /releases/
        /1.10.1/
        /1.10.2/
        /1.10.3/
      /merges/
        /dev_ajax/
          /trunk-7890
        /rev_1_10/
          /trunk-7043/
          /trunk-7194/
          /trunk-7300/

This was useful for keeping things organized in Subversion, so that we could
easily find a tag for a previous merge in order to determine the revisions to
specify for a new merge. But because older tags were moved from previous
locations, and because newer tags were in subdirectories of the “tags”
directory, `git-svn` did not identify them as tags. Well, that's not really
fair. It *did* identify earlier tags, before they were moved, but all the other
tags were not found. Instead I ended up with tags in Git named `tags/releases`
and `tags/merges`, which was useless. But even if all of our tags had been
identified as tags, none had parent commit IDs, so there was no place to see
where they actually came from.

So to rebuild the commit, release, and merge history from Subversion, I first
created a local copy of the subversion repository using `svnsync`. Then I cloned
it to Git like so:

    SVNREPO=file:///Users/david/svn_bricolage_cc
    git svn init $SVNREPO --stdlayout
    git config svn.authorsfile /Users/david/bric_authors.txt
    git svn fetch --no-follow-parent --revision 5517:HEAD

By starting with r5517, which was the first real commit to Subversion, I avoided
the `git-svn` error I [reported last week]. In truth, though, I ended up running
this clone many, *many* times. The first few times, I ran it with
`--no-metadata`, as [recommended] in various HOWTOs. But then I kept getting
errors such as:

    git svn log
    fatal: bad default revision 'refs/remotes/git-svn'
    ----------------------------------------------------

This was more than a little annoying, and it took me a day or so to realize that
this was because I had been using `--no-metadata`. Once I killed off that
option, things worked much better

Furthermore, by starting at r5517 and passing the `--no-follow-parent` option,
`git-svn` ran much more quickly. Rather than taking 30 hours to get all
revisions including stuff that had been moved around (and then failing), it now
took around 90 minutes to do the export. Much more manageable, although I also
started making backup copies and restoring from them as I experimented with
fixing branches and tags. Ultimately, I ended up also passing the
`--ignore-paths` option, to exclude various branches that were never really used
or that I had already fetched in their entirety from CVS:

    git svn fetch --no-follow-parent --revision 5517:HEAD \
    --ignore-paths '(David|Kineticode|Release_|dev_(callback|(media_)?templates)|rev_1_([024]|[68]_temp)|tags/(Dev-|Release_|Start|help|mark|rel_1_([24567]|8_0)|rev_1_([26]|8_merge-2004-05-04)))|tmp'
    svn2git --no-clone

The call to [svn2git] converts remote branches to local tags and branches. Now I
had a reasonably clean copy of the repository (aside from the 120 or so commits
from when Marshall did the tags reorganization) for me to work with. I opened it
up with [GitX] and started scripting out merges.

To assist in this, I took a hint from [Ask Bjørn Hansen], sent in email in
response to a Tweet, and tagged every single commit with its corresponding
Subversion revision number, like so (in Perl):

``` perl
for my $c (`git rev-list --all --date-order --timestamp | sort -n | awk '{print \$2}'`) {
    chomp $c;
    my ($svnid) = `git show -s $c | tail -1` =~ /[@](\d+)\s+/;
    system qw(git tag -f), $svnid, $c;
}
```

The nice thing about this is that it made it easy for me to scan through the
commits in GitX and see where things were. It also meant that I could reference
these tags when I wrote the code to manage the merges. So what I did was sort
the commits in reverse chronological order, and then search for those with the
word “merge” in their subjects. When one was clearly for a merge (as opposed to
simply using the word “merge”), I would disable the search, scroll through the
commits until I found the selected commit, and then look for a likely prior
commit that it merged from.

This was a bit of pain in the ass, because, unfortunately, GitX doesn't keep the
selected commit record in the middle of the screen when you cancel the search.
Mail.app does this right: If I do a search, select a message, then cancel the
search, the selected message is still in the middle of the screen. But with
GitX, as I said, I have to scroll to find it. This wasn't going to scale very
well. So what I did instead was search for “merge”, then I took a screen shot of
the results and cancelled the merge. Then I just opened the screenshot in
Preview, looked at the records there, then found them in GitX. This made things
go quite a bit faster.

{{% figure
  src   = "merges.gif"
  alt   = "Commits that mention merging in GitX"
  class = "frame"
%}}

As a result, I added a migration function to properly tag merges. It looked like
this:

``` perl
sub graft_merges {
    print "Grafting merges\n";
    # Handle the merges.
    for my $graft (
        [qw( trunk@5524   rev_1_8@5523 )],
        [qw( trunk@5614   rev_1_8@5613 )],
        [qw( rev_1_8@5591 trunk@5590   )],
    ) {
        my ($commit, $parent) = map { s/.+[@]//; $_ } @$graft;
        my $cmd = "\$(git rev-parse $commit) "
                . "\$(git rev-parse $commit^) "
                . "\$(git rev-parse $parent)";
        `echo "$cmd" >> .git/info/grafts`;
    }
}
```

By referencing revision tags explicitly, I was able to just use `git rev-parse`
to look up SHA1 hash IDs to put into `.git/info/grafts`. This saved me the
headache of dealing with very long IDs, but also allowed me to easily keep track
of revision numbers and branches (the branch information is actually superfluous
here, but I kept it for my sanity). So, basically, for
`[qw( trunk@5524 rev_1_8@5523 )]`, it ends up writing the SHA1 hashes for r5524,
the existing parent commit for r5524 (that's the `$commit^` bit), and for the
new parent, r5523. I ended up with 73 merges that needed to be properly
recorded.

With the merges done, I next dove into branches. For some reason, `git-svn`
failed to identify a parent commit for *any* branch. Maybe because I started
with r5517? I have no idea. So I had to search through the commits to see when
branches were started. I mainly did this by looking at the branches in [ViewVC].
By clicking each one, I was able to see the earliest commit, which usually had a
name like “Created a branch for my SoC project.” I would then look up that
commit in ViewVC, such as [r7423], which started the “dev\_ajax” branch, just to
make sure that it was copied from trunk. Then I simply went into GitX, found
r7423, then looked back to the last commit to trunk before r7423. That was the
parent of the branch. With such data, I was able to write a function like this:

``` perl
sub graft_branches {
    print "Grafting branches\n";
    for my $graft (
        [qw( dev_ajax@7423            trunk@7301 )],
        [qw( dev_mysql@7424           trunk@7301 )],
        [qw( dev_elem_occurrence@7427 trunk@7301 )],
    ) {
        my ($commit, $parent) = map { s/.+[@]//; $_ } @$graft;
        my $cmd = "\$(git rev-parse $commit) "
                . "\$(git rev-parse $parent)";
        `echo "$cmd" >> .git/info/grafts`;
    }
}
```

Here I only needed to look up the revision and its parent and write it to
`.git/info/grafts`. Then all of my branches had parents. Or nearly all of them;
those that were also in the old CVS repository will have to wait until the two
are stitched together to find their parents.

Next I needed to get releases properly tagged. This was not unlike the merge tag
work: I just had to find the proper revision and tag it. This time, I looked
through the commits in GitX for those with “tag for” in their subjects because,
conveniently, I nearly always used this phrase in a release tag, as in “Tag for
the 1.8.11 release of Bricolage.” Then I just looked back from the tag commit to
find the commit copied to the tag, and *that* commit would be tagged with the
release tag. The function to create the tags looked like this:

``` perl
sub tag_releases {
    print "Tagging releases\n";
    for my $spec (
        [ 'rev_1_8@5726' => 'v1.8.1'  ],
        [ 'rev_1_8@5922' => 'v1.8.2'  ],
        [ 'rev_1_8@6073' => 'v1.8.3'  ],
    ) {
        my ($where, $tag) = @{$spec};
        my ($branch, $rev) = split /[@]/, $where;
        my $tag_date = `git show --pretty=format:%cd -s $rev`;
        chomp $tag_date;
        local $ENV{GIT_COMMITTER_DATE} = $tag_date;
        system qw(git tag -fa), $tag, '-m', "Tag for $tag release of Bricolage.", $rev;
    }
}
```

I am again indebted to [Ask][Ask Bjørn Hansen] for the code here, especially to
set the date for the tag.

Since I had created new release tags and recreated the merge history in Git, I
no longer needed the old tags from Subversion, so next I rewrote the
`--ignore-paths` option to exclude all of the tags directories, as well as some
branches that were never used:

    SVNREPO=file:///Users/david/svn_bricolage_cc
    git svn init $SVNREPO --stdlayout
    git config svn.authorsfile /Users/david/bric_authors.txt
    git svn fetch --no-follow-parent --revision 5517:HEAD
    git svn fetch --no-follow-parent --revision 5517:HEAD \
    --ignore-paths '(David|Kineticode|Release_|dev_(callback|(media_)?templates)|rev_1_([024]|[68]_temp)|tags/)|tmp';

With this in hand, I killed off the call to `svn2git`, opting to convert trunk
and the remote branches myself (easily done by copying-and-pasting the relevant
Perl code). Then all I needed to do was clean up the extant tags and run
`git-filter-branch` to make the grafts permanent:

``` perl
sub finish {
    print "Deleting old tags\n";
    my @tags = grep m{^tags/}, map { s/^\s+//; s/\s+$//; $_ } `git branch -a`;
    system qw(git branch -r -D), $_ for @tags;

    print "Deleting revision tags\n";
    @tags_to_delete = grep { /^\d+$/ } map { s/^\s+//; s/\s+$//; $_ } `git tag`;
    system qw(git tag -d), $_ for @tags_to_delete;

    print "Grafting...\n";
    system qw(git filter-branch);
    system qw(git gc);
}
```

And now I have a nicely organized Git repository based on the Bricolage
Subversion repository, with all (or most) merges in their proper places, release
tags, and branch tracking. Now all I have to do is stitch it together with the
repository [based on CVS][post] and I'll be ready to put this sucker on GitHub!
More on that in my next post.

  [post]: {{% ref "/post/past/bricolage/vcs/bricolage-cvs-to-git.md" %}}
    "Migrating Bricolage CVS to Git"
  [Bricolage Subversion repository]: http://svn.bricolage.cc/
  [branches directory]: http://svn.bricolage.cc/bricolage/branches/
  [tags setup]: http://svn.bricolage.cc/bricolage/tags/
  [Marshall]: https://github.com/mroch "Marshall Roch"
  [reported last week]: https://marc.info/?t=123964664700006
    "Git Mail List: “Again with git-svn: File was not found in commit”"
  [recommended]: https://web.archive.org/web/20090424162957/http://www.simplisticcomplexity.com/2008/03/05/cleanly-migrate-your-subversion-repository-to-a-git-repository/
    "Simplistic Complexity: “Cleanly Migrate Your Subversion Repository To a GIT Repository”"
  [svn2git]: ttps://github.com/schwern/svn2git/ "svn2git on GitHub"
  [GitX]: https://gitx.frim.nl
  [Ask Bjørn Hansen]: http://www.askask.com/
  [ViewVC]: http://viewsvn.bricolage.cc/bricolage/branches/
    "Bricolage Branches in ViewVC"
  [r7423]: http://viewsvn.bricolage.cc/?view=revision&revision=7423
