--- 
date: 2011-11-30T05:34:11Z
slug: iovationeering
title: iovationeering
aliases: [/autobiographical/iovationeering.html]
tags: [Personal, Work, Postgres, Data Architecture, Bricolage, PGXN, Kineticode, PostgreSQL Experts]
type: post
---

Since June, as part of my work for [PGX], I’ve been doing on-site full-time
consulting for [iovation] here in Portland. iovation is in the business of
deterring online fraud via device identification and reputation. Given the
nature of that business, a whole lot of data arrives every day, and I’ve been
developing PostgreSQL-based solutions to help get a handle on it. The work has
been truly engaging, and a whole hell of a lot of fun. And there are some really
great, very smart people at iovation, whom I very much like and respect.

{{% figure src="iovation.jpg" class="right" alt="iovation" link="https://iovation.com/" %}}

So much so, in fact, that I decided to accept their offer of a full time
position as “Senior Data Architect.” I started on Monday.

I know, crazy, right? They’ve actually been talking me up about it for a long
time. In our initial contact close to two years ago, as I sought to land them as
a PGX client, they told me they wanted to hire someone, and was I interested. I
said “no.” I said “no” through four months of contracting this summer and fall,
until one day last month I said to myself, “wait, *why* don’t I want this job?”
I had been on automatic, habitually insisting I wasn’t interested in a W2
position. And with good reason. Aside from 15 months as [CTO at values of n]
(during which time I worked relatively independently anyway), I’ve been an
independent consultant since I founded Kineticode in November of 2001. Yeah.
*Ten Years.*

Don’t get me wrong, those ten years have been *great!* Not only have I been able
to support myself doing the things I love—and learned a *ton* in the process—but
I’ve managed to write a [lot][] [of][] [great][] [code]. Hell, I will be
continuing as an associate with [PGX], though with greatly reduced
responsibilities. And someday I may go indy again. But in the meantime, the
challenges, opportunities, and culture at iovation are just too good to pass up.
I’m loving the work I’m doing there, and expect to learn a lot over the next few
years.

{{% figure src="kineticode.gif" class="left" alt="Kineticode" link="https://kineticode.com/" %}}

So what, you might ask, does this mean for Kineticode, the company I founded to
offer support, consulting, and training services for [Bricolage CMS]? The truth
is that Kineticode has only a few technical support customers left; virtually
all of my work for the last two years has been through PGX. So I’ve decided to
shut Kineticode down. I’m shifting the Bricolage tech support offerings [over to
PGX] and having Kineticode’s customers move there as their contacts come up for
renewal. They can expect the same great service as always. Better even, as there
are 10 associates in PGX, and, lately, only me at Kineticode. Since Kineticode
itself is losing its Raison d’être, it’s going away.

{{% figure src="pgx.png" class="right" alt="PGX" link="https://pgexperts.com/" %}}

I intend to remain involved in the various open-source projects I work on. I
still function as the benevolent dictator of [Bricolage CMS], though other folks
have stepped up their involvement quite a lot in the last few years. And I
expect to keep improving [PGXN] and [DesignScene] as time allows (I’ve actually
been putting some effort into both in the last few weeks; watch for [PGXN][1]
and [Lunar/Theory] announcements in the coming weeks and months!). And, in fact,
I expect that a fair amount of the work I do at iovation will lead to blog
posts, conference presentations, and more open-source code.

This is going to be a blast. Interested in a front-row seat? [Follow me on
Twitter].

  [PGX]: https://pgexperts.com/
  [iovation]: https://iovation.com/
  [CTO at values of n]: {{% ref "/post/past/personal/im-back/index" %}}
  [lot]: https://github.com/theory?tab=repositories
  [of]: https://github.com/bricoleurs?tab=repositories
  [great]: https://github.com/pgxn?tab=repositories
  [code]: https://github.com/pgexperts?tab=repositories
  [Bricolage CMS]: http://bricolagecms.org/
  [over to PGX]: https://pgexperts.com/bricolage.html
    "Bricolage Technical Support from PGX"
  [DesignScene]: http://www.designsceneapp.com/
  [1]: https://blog.pgxn.org/ "PGXN Blog"
  [Lunar/Theory]: https://blog.lunar-theory.com/ "Lunar/Theory Blog"
  [Follow me on Twitter]: https://twitter.com/theory/
