content/post/past/meta/wheeler.net-migration/index.md, before:

--- 
date: 2004-06-16T01:43:24Z
slug: wheeler.net-migration
title: david.wheeler.net Content Migration
aliases: [/computers/internet/weblogs/wheeler.net_migration.html]
tags: [Just a Theory, David Wheeler, Migrations]
type: post
---

I've completed the migration of all of the content from my old site,
david.wheeler.net. All requests to that domain will get a permanent redirect to
this site. Where possible, I tried to make the old URLs redirect to the new
URLs. So if you try to connect to [david.wheeler.net/osx.html], you should be
automatically redirected to
[www.justatheory.com/computers/os/macosx/my\_adventures.html]. The same goes for
the following documents:

-   [Patch for Apache + DBM on Mac OS X]
-   [Migrating to Mac OS X]
-   [Patch for mod\_ssl on Mac OS X]

If you happen to notice that I missed anything, comment on this blog entry to
let me know.

  [david.wheeler.net/osx.html]: http://david.wheeler.net/osx.html
    "The Old Mac OS X Adventures URL"
  [www.justatheory.com/computers/os/macosx/my\_adventures.html]: /computers/os/macosx/my_adventures.html
  [Patch for Apache + DBM on Mac OS X]: /2004/06/wheeler.net-migration/apache_dbm.patch
  [Migrating to Mac OS X]: /2004/06/wheeler.net-migration/migrating_to_macosx.pdf
  [Patch for mod\_ssl on Mac OS X]: /2004/06/wheeler.net-migration/mod_ssl_dylib.patch

Commit message:

Use ref shortcut for local links
To posts, taht is. Use the link shortcut for links to static files.

content/post/past/meta/wheeler.net-migration/index.md, after:

--- 
date: 2004-06-16T01:43:24Z
slug: wheeler.net-migration
title: david.wheeler.net Content Migration
aliases: [/computers/internet/weblogs/wheeler.net_migration.html]
tags: [Just a Theory, David Wheeler, Migrations]
type: post
---

I've completed the migration of all of the content from my old site,
david.wheeler.net. All requests to that domain will get a permanent redirect to
this site. Where possible, I tried to make the old URLs redirect to the new
URLs. So if you try to connect to [david.wheeler.net/osx.html], you should be
automatically redirected to
[www.justatheory.com/computers/os/macosx/my\_adventures.html][adventures]. The
same goes for the following documents:

-   [Patch for Apache + DBM on Mac OS X]
-   [Migrating to Mac OS X]
-   [Patch for mod\_ssl on Mac OS X]

If you happen to notice that I missed anything, comment on this blog entry to
let me know.

  [david.wheeler.net/osx.html]: http://david.wheeler.net/osx.html
    "The Old Mac OS X Adventures URL"
  [adventures]: {{% ref "/post/past/tools/os/my-adventures" %}}
  [Patch for Apache + DBM on Mac OS X]: {{% link "apache_dbm.patch" %}}
  [Migrating to Mac OS X]: {{% link "migrating_to_macosx.pdf" %}}
  [Patch for mod\_ssl on Mac OS X]: {{% link "mod_ssl_dylib.patch" %}}
